THE ODYSSEY OF GLOOMY GUS
|
( in honor of a favorite uncle, August Deschler )
||

Look out into the night, into the star-embossed 
pre-ragtime sky, where Orion's drift is hailed 
not by motor sounds, but by the far-seeking 
steam whistle's cry. Few wires yet to sing 
in the zero wind, nothing to master the 
great owls gliding overflight, and there beyond the 
snowy field's sullen drifts, the shadow-grated 
woods still holds its witnesses to the 
Menominee hunter's snowshoe tread, 
a few years only from the passage 
of the myriad pigeon wings.
It's Christmas time and you are four months' old.


Yours is the legacy of blind emergent time 
with no gift of airwave's electrifying news 
but only newsprint some days behind.
Born into heaven's monopoly of what 
is to be, your choices are worn and forking roads 
with all else obscured beyond the horizon's bend 
and on this night by drifting snow.


Tomorrow and in the years ahead 
there will be rumors, advertisements 
in thumb-worn print of work to the north and west 
in ranches, lumber camps and mines.
Born into labor's day in the expansion 
empire's time, how will you make your way? 
Born into labor's time and place but still 
an incline will draw you to the printed word. 
Yet as your eye follows the staccato page 
you'll not ignore the waving branch, 
the plume of cloud.


Hear now the warrior wind that creeps 
across the frozen plain, through cedar, ash 
and pine and down the farmstead lanes. 
It snaps the clapboard covers over hewn logs 
in the glittering night where old houses 
cluster thinly. But the spring wind will bring 
back again the green-gold peace of 
sugar beets and oats, here where the dairy barns 
are red and neat, Germans beside the `Wolf 
and Poles along the Peshtigo; 
while there below the Big Lake the 
ice-shelled rapids already churn 
the squatting mills to vertigo.


And listen, listen then also for the water 
that will always be your backdrop's sound, 
or at least its silent glint, water rushing 
in rapids, millraces and over dams, 
dark muskeg~-oozings of wild streams walled
by balsam fir and spruce against the granite's glitter, 
water lapping in slowly-heaving log booms 
and stilted, cliff-encircling flumes. 
More intimate water that you'll know also, 
boggy beneath osier banks, where a boy 
will learn from you something of its muskrat-heaped
shells and the startling, contrary history 
of those locked in rocks of nearby hills. 
Still, unspoken will remain the deepest 
thoughts you'll pass along.


Now as you sleep the sleep of children 
beneath the cold rafters and hear faintly 
the knock of frost across the fields, 
so also rest the shimmering ores 
of the new iron age, the gravel banks
in the winding eskers and steep-walled kames 
beneath fresh logging burns where young aspens 
filter to yellow spring's first light.
And you rocks: keep-soundly for five decades yet 
your Pre-Cambrian sleep, then stir to the 
portentous tread of the summer geologist 
and winter miner, to break out in a 
ferment of girders, engineer-banked interstates 
and final, fatal gantries pointing to the sky. 
For good or ill, here is your epic part in time!


As a boy I awoke to the tapping of 
father's shoe hammer and the east window's light. 
O light of my youth's longing beyond the 
nagging unrest of that quiet scene in 
those luminous days when rumors were everywhere. 
Stories of fortune's trails, in school and in all 
my reading - and from the returnees, 
the walking wounded with tree-felled arms and legs 
and horse-inflicted limps but with the 
crazed mountain vision still in their eyes. 
Such were the restless century's fields
drawing all needles north and west 
out of my little room.


In Montana the ranches were so far apart 
you could ride for days, and where we
chased the cows among the sage-blown, 
snowy hills, and at night in the slat-walled 
firelight spoke of other things, of home 
and all that family brings. But with the spring
I headed west again across the shining 
Bitterroots on to the Palouse with wheat 
homesteads in a milder clime. There I 
knew lots of big men, tall as nightmares and strong. 
Though small I kept up with them all day in the sun,
staying in the fields till last seeing, 
then slept quietly in my sweat and dreamed
of my brothers and sister - till we rose 
in the sparrow-voiced dark and later 
saw the hills in soft light and away off 
dark pines waving.


Time came when Taft was elected and I, then 
wandering worker to the nations in British Columbia, 
marveled to see two hundred foot Douglas firs 
march up the wet snow mountains and come down 
like bullets in bent-barrel flumes to the rivers. 
There I learned to log the big trees and be handy 
as a millwright so that the slap of belts on pulleys 
and the whine of saws became my music,
 where between nursing donkey engines 
and growing sure in my calk boots 
I twice pulled comrades from the stygian ponds. 
There also on Saturday nights we sought 
the boardwalk clubs floating in the bark-laced mud 
for beer and ale and whiskey enough 
to thin a logger's blood.


And so I grew my first beard in tree-hidden camps 
and wild little towns where women were scarce 
and informal times. Yet more than once 
I got to know a face, a form, that set 
my thoughts skidding, but always lost courage in the end. 
Yet could I have ventured in what for me was sweet excess,
beyond those starved dreams there in the lonely bunks 
of the world, I'd have given up all the bright dawns 
of new country risings and all the rumbling 
music of rails in those far blue mountains.


But then came the war to a century only 
in its teens, and I like others was
swept along, first again to the scene of my 
youngest dreams, the picture farms, the rivers that 
flowed to lakes with sandy summer shores. 
Then when the notice came I left for camp, 
and for once no train ran north and west for me 
but south and east, in time through limestone hills 
and finally the deep south's pineland plain. 
No neatness there but lapsing farms with shambly  
tumble down of ornate eves and porticos 
and at the end the rows of tents 
like play shapes ruled in baking sand. 
And there we learned to force march and shoot 
but mostly did nonsense kinds of work,
yet were always near the half-familiar 
Georgia woods, our happy refuge from the 
discipline that some of us were born to laugh away. 
Then after sidestepping the plague of flu 
that brought so many comrades down, 
it all ended with the war, and again 
I saw that which I'd given up for lost:
those bright green hills and skies of coldstream blue,
that only home I'll ever know.


From the first I was of an independent bent, 
surviving like a dandelion
in that priest-hoed garden, and fossils 
were more to me than tracks of thunderbolts 
in Adam's world, ages of rocks evidence
of time before the rock of ages. 
Yet sometimes at night I thought of when 
it all would end and felt a hollow here inside,
but it was a hollow ghosts could never fill. 
And so my life moved on with each day 
precious because it was me, and yet 
almost as seen through another's eyes, 
like those arrivals on fine spring days 
at my sister's, leaving all the 
weekday wheels and pulley belts behind 
and roving over that lush green earth 
I sometimes longed to possess, there in 
those ice-sculpted hills, still with 
a trace of boundless wilderness.


There was one year when the sun beat hot all spring 
without rain, and I turned up the dried marsh for corn 
that ended ten feet high in the black peat, made
raised vegetable beds and lavished great patches
of pumpkins and melons while neighbors' crops 
withered in the highland dust. O but to
relive those bygone days and hear once more 
the first birdsong before the new day's rising, 
to stand strong again in those fields and follow 
the crow's awkward flight against the wind-shaped 
white of cloud.


Those were the Hoover days when I joked 
about eating sawdust but lost my job in earnest, 
and each week had to borrow enough for a 
package of Plowboy. Then it was that old Dick 
stayed away, avoiding me for the money 
that he never would repay. His was a whole
business down the drain - and the mill where I'd worked. 
But the loss of job and money never cost 
me a sleepless night - or at most nearly none 
when like a child I whiled away my gardening 
sojourn there in the 30's summer sun.


After all the years it's not hard to say 
what counted most with me: to see the world 
come into flower and leaf in May, 
the flight of a rabbit in the snowy woods,
a child's eyes where I was welcome.
Always it was the working life and nature's 
unbounded sweep that gave me joy - and a job
well done, to stand back and view it then! 
What's life for? In a way it's nothing but a show
but big, a gale that blows with lightning, 
cold rain, and then a jagged patch of blue again, 
ever warring with the clouds, yet all motion 
directed toward some end, but an end 
we'll never know, like the winged wedges 
in the fall that make us wonder where they go.


Yes, everything has changed, is changing, 
as did the great pineries I once saw -
all gone. And in the mills where we used 
the river's flow, now electric motors run. 
The passenger trains that fed our delight 
in the passing scene - all turned to scrap, 
while everyone sprouts wings. Each year 
the metronome beats louder, faster, and 
where our hope once sprang from the sound 
of bright new hammers, we cower beneath \
the time bomb's throb - that shakes the world 
and makes the children cry.


A poet once wrote that he could hear 
America singing, another praised 
what the Wright- boys did off Cape Hattera's shore. 
O I too could hear the singing power 
of what was and what could be, and great
it was. And I saw us get it all! 
In the mountains of the Pacific coast
I cut the firs, in the chattering mills 
tended the machines that cut the
straight run beams, the scaffolding of factories, 
the roundhouses and workshops of tycoon's 
dreams. But what for? All this to serve 
no lasting end, all this to make a hole? 
No. I didn't live to make it so!


But was it worth it then, the nights spent 
in the little rooms with shirts hung over chairs, 
the wrinkled suit in a dingy closet, 
the few blankets, the bundle of precious papers 
in the drawer, worn shoes beneath the bed 
and little more? How could I stand this life
above some tavern's late night din 
with raucous voices getting tight? Was it worth it? 
Hell yes it was! Those voices in the bar 
belonged to friends. The room gave me as much 
shelter as I ever needed and privacy 
to read and think. It was my base of operations 
you might say, from which I roamed as free 
as I might be. No one ever told me 
what I could do when I was there, 
and I came and went just as I pleased, 
cashed checks and deposited in banks 
or spent it on a round of drinks.


Yet it cuts me deep each time I think of friends, 
the burden of one who's lived so long, 
enough to pass a joke at many a 
boardinghouse table, to see come into view 
familiar houses on so many milltown streets 
and know the welcoming smile of the men 
and women I got to meet; but also 
to see time's hard hand bend a back 
and seam a face and fell them one by one 
while only I lived on.


And now I stand on this lonely pinnacle of age,
look back on so great a voyage in time, 
yet scarce enough to answer the few 
questions that were mine. And even where
answers were clearly given the questions 
themselves have changed like spotted 
chameleons to my vision! Men are men 
when they can decide, whether for life 
and death or heaven and damnation. 
Hemmed in by circumstance their spirits 
narrow and their courage fades, then less 
than men, fear drives them till they die. 
Fear death? Indeed I do, 
and when it comes the arrow of my life may circle back again 
to childhood's terrors of the night and 
all the ageless fears learned by me then.
 

But now, just now, as I view the scene
with rational eyes, I greet the world 
and relish each new gift of day, and in my mind
I dare adventure still, free and unafraid.


|
This poem attempts what is possibly the impossible, the encapsulation of a life in formal stanzas. And unlike most of this collection it leaves me with little satisfaction as to style, although, barring some license, I believe it is true to its subject. This man "Augie" or "Gloomy Gus" was unusual in his culture and as one with his background, in that he was given to bold though gentle spoofs of religion and all its practitioners. Products of a generally questioning mind, these opinions were never hidden from even the youngest children, and may well have been a factor in the early formation of my own opinions on the subject. He was, despite an outdated and limited education, well read, particularly in science, and was the first to acquaint me with the fossils that abounded on our farm. I remember, also, with almost total recall, how, on a walk together along the swamp stream, we found a pile of empty water snail shells, that he attributed to the foraging of a Muskrat, which had also left its droppings. I've never since, on seeing such shell piles, failed to think of him and the original incident.  I first became aware of him when he visited us while I was very young and he had a secure position as a foreman-millwright in a paper roll plug factory in Menasha. On those occasions he usually arrived with a large meat roast for our Sunday dinner. At those times also, he would delight me by holding me on his lap while he read the "funnies", and on departing again for town he invariably gave Mother a sheaf of greenbacks.
He was loyal to his friends, which made him vulnerable to sob stories. An example was his disastrous loan of money, to his employer "Chick" L during the Great Depression, and which left him destitute and temporarily dependent on relatives.
For some time, during this period, he lived with us, unsuccessfully seeking local work, but growing huge vegetables, particularly in a dried out part of the marsh. In one place, along the stream, he constructed elevated beds with black, peaty soil dug from the stream channel.
This was also the time of  Prohibition, which gave rise to strange events, as when an isolated barn about a half mile from our house sprouted a tall smokestack, which then began to spout black smoke around the clock! From this and the increased truck traffic on the road past our house, it soon became clear that this was an illicit distillery, and my desperately unemployed uncle considered seeking work there. However, before he could apply, the place was raided by federal agents, who destroyed the still and dumped the mash in a nearby forested wetland ( part of one of my favorite haunts,"Bauer's Woods", where I learned to identify many native plants ), which then for years marked the event by a stand of dead trees.


