MAKE REVOLUTION
|||
Rebel Now!
Rebel against smoothness, uniformity and straightness.
Rebel against comfort, security and greatness.
Against the smooth curve and brightness (except the stars).
Rebel against great piles, monuments and towers,
The leveling of fields, all shafts and cuts,
And against the pursed lip and neatness

			2.

Rebel against the furrow, the fence, the ditch,
The road, the dam, circumference, and all truncations.
Rebel against lines-of-sight and excavations,
Marching, lording, anthropomorphic gods and authorizations.
Rebel against ancestor-worship and justifications,
Rights, assertions, pride, institution-worship, domestication,
Clean underwear, and polished boots,
Against expediency, commerce, chairs, tables, and salvation.

			3.

Rebel against watches, orders, reports, blarings, hums,
Against clanks, rulers, latches, chemical and mechanical solutions.
Rebel against the sky-defilers, defilers of earth and water,
Against using wilderness, cutting tree roots, and universal harvesting,
Against nature solace and stewardship,
Even against nature as science and nature as art.

			4.

Instead
Seek out discomfort, insecurity, roughness, and angularity,
Chaff, dross, waviness, dimnness and granularity,
Great mountain floods, wild washes, cloudiness,
Heat, frost, blue sky, spunk and slime,
Humidity, drought, cyclones and denial.
Then your shadow is the world at play.


|

Nature usually exhibits a fruitful balance between order and disorder-or low and high entropy. But Human culture tends to greatly emphasize order and the myth of "control." In a sense order and neatness are the enemies of much that is most worth cherishing in our lives. The investments of time and energy to achieve them subtract from Nature's greatest gifts and learning experiences. Some examples are lawn care, personal cosmetics and the world of fashion But planning is necessary too, to avoid the pitfalls of chaos, or disorder without the balance of order. Of course, this balance comes out of our personalities to a large degree, although it can be learned through experience and by example-for which I thank my mother! 
